Hamlet and Oedipus as Tragic Heroes in Shakespeare’s Hamlet and Sophocles’ Oedipus the KingAn Aristotelian tragic hero is a literary character who makes an error in judgement that inevitably leads to their downfall. In particular, the character embodies several characteristics including hamartia, an error in judgment or tragic flaw, peripeteia, a reversal of fortune, anagnorisis, recognition of own mistake leading to reversal of fortune, and hubris, which is excessive pride. Both Hamlet in Shakespeare’s play, Hamlet, and Oedipus in Sophocles’ play, Oedipus the King, are Aristotelian tragic heroes as they exemplify hamartia, anagnorisis, and hubris, which eventually leads to their downfall. However, Oedipus is more hubristic than Hamlet due to his arrogance.To start, Hamlet and Oedipus have tragic flaws and an error in judgment that contribute to their downfall. Hamlet’s hamartia is his indecisiveness and inability to act on his father’s death, which results in his cowardly behaviour. Although Hamlet knows that he must avenge his father’s death, he is a contemplative and hesitant character who thinks rather than acting on his thoughts. For instance, Hamlet procrastinates due to self-doubt and his conscience as implied when he says, “The spirit that I have seen/ May be a devil, and the devil hath power/ T’ assume a pleasing shape” (Shakespeare 2.2.627-629). Although King Hamlet’s ghost wants Hamlet to take revenge, Hamlet feels that he needs better proof than the ghost as it could be a devil in disguise. Hamlet speculates that the ghost may want him to commit a sin and go to hell. By delaying action, Hamlet allows Claudius to plan out his murder. In essence, Hamlet’s main tragic flaw, or hamartia, is his inability to avenge his father’s death due to his conscience. On the contrary, Oedipus’s hamartia is his impulsive and rash character, which makes him act on his instincts and unaware of the consequences of certain actions. In particular, Oedipus’ short temper and rash behaviour makes him kill his real father. His rash behaviour is exhibited when he recounts the past: “I became angry/ and struck the coachman who was pushing me…And then I killed them all” (Green 939-947).  Oedipus is quick to act on his instincts as he kills the old man and all other men without thinking twice after the old man tries to push him off the road. Due to his short temper and rashness, Oedipus kills his father unknowingly and later moves on to marry his mother in Thebes. If he had not killed his father, there would be no plague affecting the city of Thebes, thus the prophecy regarding Oedipus’ fate would not have come true. Ultimately, both Hamlet and Oedipus are tragic heroes in terms of having a tragic flaw that leads to their downfall. Hamlet’s tragic flaw is his inconclusive and contemplative nature which hinders him from killing Claudius immediately. Oedipus unknowingly kills his father, King Laius, on the road due to his impulsiveness, which is his tragic flaw. In short, Hamlet is contemplative, whereas Oedipus is impulsive. Furthermore, Hamlet’s error of judgement is acting insane or mad as part of his plan to take revenge on Claudius. Hamlet believes that acting crazy would expose Claudius’ guilt as implied when he says, “How strange or odd some'er I bear myself/ As I perchance hereafter shall think meet/ To put an antic disposition on” (Shakespeare 1.5.190-192). The reason Hamlet decides to go mad is to prevent Claudius from suspecting him of knowing the truth behind the murder of King Hamlet. This allows Hamlet to believe that he will be safe from Claudius, but this leads to his downfall as Claudius and other individuals pay closer attention to Hamlet. Moreover, Hamlet’s act of insanity leads him toward his downfall as Claudius sends him to be killed in England due to his craziness. Regarding Oedipus, his error of judgment is his unwillingness to accept his fate. Upon hearing about his fate of killing his father and marrying his mother in Corinth, he leaves the country in an effort to escape his fate. Oedipus’ unwillingness to accept his fate is portrayed when he states, “I had to fly/and in my banishment not even see/my kindred not set foot in my own country/or otherwise my fate was to be yoked/in marriage with my mother and kill my father” (Green 957-961). Oedipus leaves Corinth in an effort to prevent himself from killing his father and marrying his mother, whom he does not know are his foster parents. If he had not listened to the prophecy and remained in Corinth, he never would have left to Thebes and killed his real father and married his real mother. Both Hamlet and Oedipus are tragic heroes as they have an error of judgment that leads to their downfall. Hamlet’s error of judgment is acting insane to avoid being suspicious, but it only makes Claudius more aware of his actions. Oedipus’ error of judgment is his unwillingness to accept his fate. If he stayed in Corinth, he never would have entered Thebes and killed the king. Nevertheless, both Hamlet and Oedipus have a tragic flaw and misjudgment that leads to their downfall, although their tragic flaws are different.In addition, anagnorisis is when the tragic hero discovers an important piece of information, finds the truth about their identity, or recognizes that their actions led to peripeteia, which is a reversal in fortune or a turning point in the story. Hamlet and Oedipus are tragic heroes as they both encounter anagnorisis. Before the sword fight with Fortinbras, Hamlet acknowledges that God controls his fate and that all he can do is react to it. Hamlet comes to a realization that “there is a divinity that shapes our ends/ rough-hew them how we will” (Shakespeare 5.2.11-12). Hamlet realizes that there is no use in overthinking about the consequences of his actions as God is responsible of his fate, thus death. He finally acknowledges that he has been thinking too hard about morals and righteous action regarding revenge. In short, Hamlet recognizes that God is in control of his fate and that he must be ready to take action, which is a significant turning point in the story. In contrast, Oedipus is aware that his own actions lead him to his downfall. He recognizes that he has been blind to the truth and his sins, thus he removes his eyes towards the end of the play. Oedipus’ recognition of his blindness of the past and his actions is suggested when he says, “Why should I see/whose vision shoed me nothing sweet to see?” (Green 1521-1522). Oedipus blinds himself in shame and disgrace regarding his rash actions of killing his father and marrying his mother. Oedipus accepts his fate as he removes his eyes for his wrongdoings and ignorance. Both Oedipus and Hamlet are tragic heroes as they experience anagnorisis. Although both characters accept the inevitability of fate, Hamlet’s recognition of his fate allows him to stop thinking and avenge his father’s death. Contrarily, Oedipus realizes that he cannot escape fate towards the end of the play as he has killed his father and married his mother. Additionally, Hamlet is aware that his inaction leads to his downfall. Hamlet accepts that he is a coward for not avenging his father’s death when he says, “A thought which, quarter’d, hat but one part wisdom/And ever three parts coward” (Shakespeare 4.4.41-42). Hamlet is comprehensive of the fact that his thoughts or conscience makes him a coward and prevents action as aforementioned in the “to be or not to be” soliloquy as he says, “Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,” (Shakespare 3.1.84). In essence, Hamlet realizes that overthinking prevents action, which leads him toward his downfall. Another instance that portrays Oedipus’ anagnorisis is when he discovers his true identity. Oedipus realizes later in the play that he is the son of King Lauis and Queen Jocasta and in shock says, “Light of the sun, let me, look upon you no more after today!/I who first saw the light bred of a match accursed and accursed in my living/with them I lived with, cursed in my killing” (Green 1364-1368). Oedipus feels disgraceful after hearing from the herdsman that Laius and Jocasta are his real parents. This is a turning point in the story as Oedipus discovers his true identity, which makes him feel guilt and disgrace, thus leading to his downfall. Both Hamlet and Oedipus encounter anagnorisis, but Hamlet understands that his inaction leads to his cowardly character, whereas Oedipus discovers his true. Oedipus feels shame and guilt for killing his father and marrying his mother, which eventually leads to his downfall as he promises that the murderer of King Laius will be punished. All in all, anagnorisis makes Oedipus and Hamlet tragic heroes as they realize that their actions lead to the reversal of fortune. As a final point, hubris refers to excessive pride or over confidence which results in a character’s hamartia. The main character of Hamlet and Oedipus the King are contrasts as Oedipus is arrogant and has excessive pride, whereas Hamlet is insecure and cowardly due to his conscience. Hamlet does not show excessive pride throughout the play as he is mostly doubtful and inconclusive. Hamlet is not arrogant and makes a self-depreciating comment “but no more like my father/Than I to Hercules” (Shakespeare 154-155). Hamlet compares himself to the courageous Greek hero and remarks that he is not as powerful or courageous as Hercules. Most importantly, Hamlet shows his lack of self-worth as he compares himself as being inferior to Hercules. Thus, Hamlet does not show excessive pride or arrogance as he is doubtful of his abilities. Conversely, Oedipus’s excessive pride is exhibited as he denies his fate, or in other words, the prophecies of Gods. His excessive pride is illustrated when Oedipus states, “Once on a time Loxias said that I should lie with my own mother andtake on my hands the blood of my own father/ And so for these long years I’ve lived away/from Corinth” (Green 1121-1124).  He essentially tries to outwit the Gods by leaving Corinth, so he cannot kill his parents, which he believes to be Polybus and Merope. The rejection of his fate and the idea that Gods control his fate resembles his excessive pride. In other words, Oedipus’ hubris is the thought he could outwit the Gods and change his fate. All in all, Oedipus and Hamlet exemplify the characteristics of a tragic hero as they both have varying hubris. Hamlet is not lacks hubris as he is insecure, whereas Oedipus is hubristic due to his arrogance. Hamlet makes self-depreciating comments about himself and shows little or no hubris. In contrast, Oedipus’s want to escape his fate ultimately drives him to his downfall. Furthermore, Hamlet is never confident of himself, but he does aim to achieve perfection, which slightly contributes to his hubris. Hamlet does not kill Claudius while he is praying because he wants his soul to go to hell. Hamlet’s aim for perfection regarding his revenge is portrayed when he states, “To take him in the purging of his soul/When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?/No./Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent./When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,/Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,/At game a-swearing” (Shakespeare 3.3.86-92). Hamlet believes that he will do a favour for Claudius if he kills him while praying, thus sending him to heaven. Instead, he wants to kill Claudius while he is committing a sin in order to send his soul to hell. This scenario displays Hamlet’s hubris as he aims for perfection, but he is not arrogant like Oedipus. In contrast, Oedipus portrays his excessive pride when he accuses Creon and Tiresias of planning to overthrow him. When Tiresias declares that Oedipus is the murder of the king, he mocks Tiresias by saying, “it [truth] has no strength/ for you because you are blind in mind and ears/as well as in your eyes” (428-430). Oedipus’ stubborn and adamant character is revealed as he mocks the prophet because he cannot accept that he is the murderer of King Laius due to his high status. Instead, he accuses Creon and Tiresias of wanting to overthrow him. Oedipus and Hamlet are hubristic, but Oedipus is more hubristic than Hamlet. Oedipus shows his excessive pride as he mocks Tiresias for stating that Oedipus is the murderer of King Laius. He is adamant as he is not willing to accept the truth. Contrarily, Hamlet never shows pride or arrogance, instead, he aims for perfection as he tries to kill Claudius when he is committing sins in order to send his soul to hell. Hamlet’s aim for perfection resembles slight hubris. All in all, Oedipus and Hamlet are tragic heroes as they both encompass varying levels of hubris. To sum up, Hamlet in Shakespeare’s Hamlet and Oedipus in Sophocles’ Oedipus the King both embody the characteristics of a tragic hero as they have tragic flaws, anagnorisis, and hubris. However, Oedipus is more hubristic than Hamlet as he shows excessive pride. Hamlet and Oedipus both have tragic flaws and misjudgement that lead to their downfall. Hamlet is contemplative and inconclusive, whereas Oedipus is rash and impulsive who acts on his instincts. Furthermore, both Oedipus and Hamlet encounter anagnorisis as they either discover their identity or realize that their actions lead to their downfall. Lastly, Oedipus is more hubristic than Hamlet as he is arrogant, whereas Hamlet is insecure. All in all, the use of tragic heroes in both plays evokes pity in the audience as they are able to connect with both Hamlet and Oedipus as they are neither evil or perfect. The different characteristics of a tragic hero make the story more intriguing and thought-provoking as the audience is compelled to understand the actions that lead to their downfall. 